Unmanned aerial vehicles or UAVs have
undoubtedly established themselves
as an effective force multiplier in
the theater of military operations.
UAVs have been successfully
used for surveillance,
reconnaissance, and combat missions.
In recent years, there has been
an increased interest in drone
swarms or multiple drones working
together, however, the potential of
such technology is yet to be seen.
But what exactly are drone swarms and why
are they making headlines all of a sudden?
Let's find out.
Together.
In this episode of Explained in
May, 2021, the Israeli Defense
Forces became the first military
to employ a drone swarm in combat.
Little is known about the event except
that Israel used the swarm attack
to strike dozens of targets together
with other missiles and munitions.
Most media outlets reported this as an
attack with multiple drones at once, but
military experts believed that this was
a true drone swarm attack, meaning that
the drones communicated and collaborated
in making collective decisions.
Swarming as a concept is not new.
Swarms can be found in nature.
Think of schools of fish, flocks
of birds, or swarms of insects.
With that said, swarming is not
limited to natural phenomena.
That is also a long established military
tactic that occurs when several units
come together to attack a target
from multiple sides in a purposely
structured and highly coordinated way.
This type of swarming has occurred
throughout military history from horse
archers in the fourth century to swarm
like cyber attacks in the 21st century,
and it is now being applied to drones.
Drone swarms represent a group
of unmanned aircraft systems
that operate collaboratively to
achieve common objectives with
an operator on her in the loop.
Coordination and reactivity
are crucial in drone swarms.
They actually represent the key
difference between a real drone swarm
and the employment of mass drones.
The latter occurs when a number of drones
are deployed against a single threat,
mainly to overwhelm the enemy's defenses.
However, each platform is usually
separately controlled and there
is no link or coordination
between the drones themselves.
Drones operating in a swarm, however,
are interlinked and are in constant
communication with each other.
The quantity of drones in a swarm
can range from a few hundred to
billions and can vary in size and
type by constantly sharing sensor
information among each other.
They are programmed to make AI
driven collective decisions in
order to achieve the set goal.
This link.
Along with the AI software are vital
in creating the hive mind that sets
drone swarms apart and allows it to
function effectively in the hive mind.
Certain drones can use their sensors
to locate and track targets sharing
this information with the rest of
the swarm, while others can perform
electronic warfare tasks and the
rest can engage hostile forces.
This way the swarm can react dynamically
to changes in the battle space by
performing these complex maneuvers.
This is what makes drone swarms
extremely dangerous and thus desirable
by every military on the planet.
We mentioned that Israel's military
already deployed drone swarm attacks, but
other countries have similar capabilities
too, including the French Iist Project,
the UAE, and South African and Raven,
the Russian Lightning, the Spanish
rappers, and the UK's Blue Bear Swarm.
The Indian Army also showed off
their drone swarm capability
during a live demonstration for
India's Army Day in early 2021.
Needless to say, the US and
China also have a number of swarm
programs in place for years.
Now, while countering large number of
drones is proving very difficult already
countering swarms, raises the bar even
further, although some organizations.
Including the UN are beginning to
classify drone swarms as weapons of mass
destruction Due to the deadly combination
of mass harm and lack of human control,
drone swarms are proliferating rapidly.
What happens next remains to be seen.
Are drone swarms really the future of
unmanned warfare, or should they be
classified as weapons of mass destruction?